Create ADR-05-Test-2-scoring.md (#4)
ustwo/architecture-kata-2025: ADR-05-Test-2-scoring.md

Reviewer: Can we change the file name to match the convention of the others please?

> # Test 2 scoring approach

Reviewer: General thought: do we need a separate ADR for how we are going to turn diagrams into something that can be systematically interacted with?

Author: Is that just a quirk of the current state of the tools?  I think someone had commented that there were improvements being made in interpretation of diagrams - can we just add a note in recognition of that, but say we assume that in two months that won't be a problem?

Reviewer: @viniciosneves-ustwo I'd be keen to get your input on this piece. We had initially suggested that diagrams use a text-based diagramming language to remove this image processing step, which might get us most of the way there if they could get students to use it

Reviewer 2: 100%, what about encouraging the use of Diagram-as-Code with Mermaid or even draw.io xml-exported files?

Reviewer: Yeah, I think Mermaid was what we referenced in the main doc, so maybe we can just assert that all of the evaluation will be text-based as a result

Author: :thumb up:

Date: 2025-03-10

## Context

> Architecture submissions are graded by Certifiable Inc, different approaches can be taken to use AI to grade submissions.  Care should be taken to avoid bias.

Reviewer: Maybe a bit more on the context of Test 2 here - that it's long form, might contain diagrams, etc. I might break out success factors as you've started here, such as:
* Avoiding bias toward answers that are superficially similar
* Ensuring high quality/confidence across a number of different "lenses", or ways of viewing a problem
* Producing an output that minimises human effort in digesting/integrating inputs to final scoring

## Decision

> The option to grade from different viewpoints has been chosen.

Reviewer: This might be _too_ succinct 😄 - maybe we can point them down to the #2 option below for further detail?

## Options Considered

All options are taken to include:
Recording the reasoning behind attributing scores

> Being primed with statements of industry best practices

Reviewer: I'm not exactly sure what this means, maybe we can elaborate on it?

A random sample of gradings being reviewed by experts 

1. Similarity to ‘known good’ submissions

> Submissions are compared to a body of expert selected high scoring previous submissions for this case study and scored for similarity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Submissions are compared to a body of expert-selected, high scoring previous submissions for this case study and scored for similarity. An answer that is very similar to previously scored 'known good' answers will be graded more highly than an answer that shares little similarity.
```

### Indicative prompt

```
Grade the following architecture for a <use case summary> for similarity to these architectures. ...
```

### Pros

> Transparent grading process.

Reviewer: Maybe also a single point of maintenance/modification? Effectively this is a monolithic scorer, so there are fewer moving parts to manage

### Cons

> Risk of bias toward irrelevant factors.  For example - if most architecture diagrams are created using draw.io, the scoring could prejudice diagrams created using a different diagramming tool.

Reviewer: I'd add Vini's example of a bunch of winning solutions using AWS, as opposed to GCP or something else - also likely to be irrelevant to the overall quality of the architecture

2. Grading from different viewpoints

Models grade submissions from a series of points of view, which are then combined to form an overall score.

### Indicative prompt

```
Grade the following architecture from the point of view of <role>: ...
```

`<Role>` being an iteration of

> A security expert

Reviewer: This is great - I wonder if we should expand on this with an example of things that a security expert would look for, e.g. minimal threat surface for attacks, reduced likelihood of over-permissioning users, etc

We should also make sure to include a "product" expert in here, that will be looking to ensure the architecture can support the functional requirements specified. We can't get carried away solving for all the NFRs without making sure we haven't built a highly-available thing that doesn't do anything :)

A software engineer tasked with implementing the system
Privacy compliance
Etc.

### Pros

> Bias is reduced

Reviewer: Maybe expand on why this reduces bias?

I'd also add that the individual "hats" are tweakable independently - for example, if a prominent new piece of data privacy legislation was introduced (GDPR 2? god help us), that particular agent could be the target for the updates instead of a monolithic system

It also allows us to weight different viewpoints differently. For example, an architecture that targets a POC might have a lower bar for an infra/devops expert than a 24x7, high volume app architecture - and scoring should factor in the relative importance of each viewpoint to the overall solution.

Extra credit if we can sneak in a mention of the single responsibility principle here, as this is really an architectural embodiment of it

Gradings are easier to explain

### Cons

## Consequences

> The grading from multiple points of view makes the grading process easier to review and is less likely to produce a monoculture.

Reviewer: I think we need to replace the word "monoculture" with something more expansive. I think we're saying that this approach will allow for a more heterogenous set of accepted answers by evaluating submissions from the perspective of multiple viewpoints, rather than from a baseline view of what the "right" architecture looks like

Author: The monoculture was a nod to favouring 'people like us', as well as a more heterogenous set of accepted answers.

### Risks

> The approach is still not foolproof against marking-down innovative solutions, grading context should include clauses to idenfity controvertial choices that are well explained and flag these for human review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The approach is still not foolproof against marking-down innovative solutions, grading context should include clauses to identify controversial choices that are well explained and flag these for human review.
```
